---
title: "Primitive types in Javascript and Ruby: what are they and why do you care?"
subtitle: "Tech Jargon Series"
date: "2019-05-04"
draft: false
---

A primitive data type is the most basic data type available in a given language.
The available primitive types vary depending on which language you are working
with — I’ll discuss Javascript and Ruby. In all cases, a primitive data type
refers to a built-in type within a language, and one which does not require
other types to function.

### Examples

Most programming languages have an `Int` or `Integer` data type. They can be
added, subtracted, and you can represent whole numbers with them.

Another extremely common type is `String` — you can store characters in them.
But because of how computers store information, they may be primitive types or
not, depending on the language you’re using (more on that below).

### How computers store information

To understand the nature of a primitive data type, it’s helpful to back up and
look at how computers store information. As you probably know, computers store
everything as 1s and 0s. These are grouped 8 together into a byte

### References

* [MDN Data Structures
docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures)
* [https://www.techopedia.com/definition/29494/primitive-data-type](https://www.techopedia.com/definition/29494/primitive-data-type)

#### The Tech Jargon Series

There are so many phrases that get thrown around at tech meetups and
conferences, assuming that everyone is already down with the lingo. I’m often
not down with the lingo. It’s common for developers to act astonished that I
lack a piece of knowledge.

The truth is, I often just don’t know the right word for it. As humans, but
especially developer humans, we love to dismiss those who don’t “talk the talk”,
so this series is about getting a solid understanding of programming concepts
that one “should know”.

I’ve previously covered: [higher-order
functions](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/higher-order-functions-what-they-are-and-a-react-example-1d2579faf101)
and [function declarations vs. function
expressions](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/when-to-use-a-function-declarations-vs-a-function-expression-70f15152a0a0).
Look out for more as I go to meetups and conferences and pretend to know what my
fellow techies are talking about, but then have to go home and Google it. [Tweet
at me](http://www.twitter.com/@heyamberwilkie) if you have a concept you’d like
me to cover!

