---
title: "How to interview your interviewers while job-hunting"
subtitle: "Twelve questions to ask at tech interviews"
draft: false
date: "2019-03-07"
---
I’ve just come off six weeks’ of interviewing for medior software developer
roles, in a market that is desperate for talent (Amsterdam). That means I went
on a *lot* of interviews. In order to tease out which companies might be right
for me, I wanted to ask many questions. You’ll have to find the right balance
for you and the person(s) interviewing you.

![Street signs at the tram museum in Gothenburg, Sweden](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*z-UEcuIZeHB_isrPIu-tzA.jpeg)

If you’re job-hunting as a junior, you may find that you don’t actually care
about the answers to any of these — you just want a job. Even if that’s the
case, consider what would be a red flag for you and ask questions that will
tease that information out of your interviewers. If there’s a deal-breaker, you
want to know about it *before* you accept a job offer.

### The typical process

Based on my experience, here’s how the process of interviewing generally goes:

1.  **Screening call / potentially on-site interview**. Typically done by someone in
HR. If done by someone technical, it’s normally quite short (not a good time to
fire all your questions).
1.  **Technical interview**. You’ll have another round of interviews with actual
developers and they’ll dig into your knowledge.
1.  **Technical assessment / homework / pair programming**. Huge bonus points for
companies doing pair programming, in my opinion. I understand why they assign
homework, but for the most part it’s a waste of everyone’s time and does not
assess the right skills.
1.  **Final interview, meeting the rest of the team**. Sometimes this interview is
replaced with meeting the founder(s), if it’s a small company.
1.  **Offer**.

Naturally, this all differs quite a bit per company, but it’s a general outline
for what you might expect during the hiring process.

### Questions for your screener

It’s very common to have someone non-technical do the first interview. It’s not
appropriate to ask them stack questions, because they often have no idea
whatyou’re talking about — even in small companies.

Most of this call should be you talking about you. They already have your CV,
but they’ll expect an introduction — make sure you have a **good and concise
story to tell about your work history**.You’ll be repeating this story ad
nauseum while interviewing.

#### What is the hiring process?

It’s likely they’ll go through this with you anyway, but if they don’t, be sure
to find out what all the specific steps are with this company. If you’re just
testing the waters here and they expect you to build a complete app next, it’s
probably best to move along.

#### Tell me a little about the tech team.

How many members, makeup junior vs. senior, and any hierarchies (is there a CTO?
Product owner?) should be easy for the HR person to explain. If not,
particularly at large companies, that’s fine too.

Make sure you know the next step before you get off the phone with your
screener.

### Questions for the technical interview

Here’s where the bulk of my questions come out. They’re assessing you, but
you’re also assessing them. Let your interviewers drive the conversation, but
it’s fine to jump in with a question or two along the way. At the end of the
meeting, they should ask if you have any questions and you can ask as many of
these as feels right for the moment.

If you don’t care about the answer to a question, don’t ask it. There’s no point
in wasting everyone’s time talking about a thing unless it will help you decide
whether or not to work there.

I put these in order of relevance to me. If we’re having a nice chat, I probably
don’t get to the ones at the end. If it’s a little painful and hard to talk to
my interviewer, I might get to ask all of them, and hope that I have better
rapport with the rest of the team.

#### Who is your ideal candidate for this role?

I really like this question because it gives you a better idea of what is
expected of you, by framing it in a new way. If your interviewer(s) could create
a person out of thin air to fill this role, who would that person be? Sometimes
they will describe you to a T and other times you’ll hear a lot that
doesn’talign with your background / skills / preferences. It’s a good way to see
if you’d be a good fit at the company.

For instance, one company said they wanted someone who “doesn’t need a lot of
help”. To me, that’s a red flag. Anyone coming into a new code base needs help
to understand the business logic, even if they’re experts in the tech the code
is built on. Developers who are hostile to a learning environment are a big
turn-off for me.

On the other hand, I frequently heard that their ideal candidate would work
“independently”and be “self-motivated”. These are great signs for me, as I see
myself as both of them and don’t want a lot of nit-picking and forced structure
in my own work. The two answers might mean exactly the same thing, but how
they’re framed makes a big difference for your work environment.

#### What are the biggest challenges for this role?

The answer to this questions depends very much on what you’ll be doing. In all
cases, it’s a great way to see behind some of the sunny information you’ll get
from the rest of your chat. Pay close attention to what they think will be
difficult in this role, and evaluate if you’re the right person to meet those
challenges.

#### Who sets the vision for this company?

I’m looking here for the long-term plan, and hopefully to talk some about goals
for growth. The only answer that strikes me as a red flag is if they don’t know
how to answer thequestion.“The founder” seems like a fine answer for me for a
small company, and “the board” and “management” as you get into larger
companies. Major bonuses if everyone feels that they have input into creating a
larger vision and roadmap.Blank stares would be bad here— you want to work at a
company that knows where it’s going.

#### *How do you measure the success of the development team / individuals / the company?

Again, a process question. I want to know how my work and my team’s work will be
evaluated.If they have trouble with this one, I switch it around and ask how
they know if they’ve done a bad job.In my opinion, if there’s no way to know if
you’ve done well, but they’re clear about what “messing up” looks like, that’s a
red flag.How can you be successful at your job if you don’t know what being
successful looks like?

#### What is the most enjoyable / frustrating thing about working here?

This question is great to re-use on multiple people.Ask it as two questions,
back-to-back (I prefer asking the positive one first). You’ll often see patterns
come up — everyone is annoyed about the same things. Getting people to talk
about a negative is always hard in interviews, but I find this one is difficult
for people to side-step.

They probably won’t tell you the big systemic problems of the company (they
might) but at least you’ll get a feel for some of the process / personality /
bureaucracy challenges of working there

#### Describe the code review process.

The answer to this one tends to be fairly short — they do PRs, a colleague
reviews on GitHub / wherever. Dig a little further to find out what kinds of
reviews, the average time to merge after submission, etc.Are they going to be
super nit-picky about everything? Let massive errors through? Do they actually
care or are they just showing off their own knowledge?What about testing? How
often do they release?

#### How does an idea go from “out in the world” into the backlog and finally to code and production — walk me through your feature development process.

I want to know where new ideas come from. Are they looking at the data and then
building based on an informed worldview? Or does the founder get an idea and
then everyone jumps to meet his expectations?

This question is a lot like the “vision” one, and can be asked as a follow-up.
Once you have the vision, how does an actual feature get described and then
coded? I consider this the closest to “what is it like to work here?” without
needing to ask in those words and get a trite answer.

#### Explain a technical challenge you’ve recently faced.

If they struggle with the question above, this one should be easier — I’m asking
for a concrete example of recent work they’ve done. Was there collaboration
among teammembers or did one person just figure it out themselves? Were external
resources brought in? Was the feature dropped?Again, this question is good for
getting an idea of the day-to-day operations.

#### Bonus: What are the plans for onboarding new hires? How do you incorporate new developers into the team?

I consider this one fairly low-priority *unless you are junior*. Juniorsshould
be looking for significant plans for onboarding and even training. Mediors and
seniors can ask this question to see if they have an answer. I’d like to know
that they have considered what it is like for new developers to start. Have they
thought about how to make the transition into the company easier? It’s not
necessarily a deal-breaker if they haven’t — because lots of companies have not.

Related, I like to ask if they hire juniors and how they work with them, but
only if we are already solid that I am not a junior. I’m nearly three years into
my career, but I don’t want to give anyone ideas. More senior engineers could
ask this without fear of being mistaken for a junior, and get good information
about how employees are valued.

### Questions for the final interview

In this last interview, you might already be talking salaries and start dates.
If they make you an offer, get really clear on what is on the table — bonuses,
pension, equity, vacation days, starting date, etc.

Here’s a question you might consider asking but need to tread lightly and read
the room:

#### Are there any internal politics I need to watch out for?

In a bigger company, they can put this on “sales” and let you know that they are
the gods around here and not to piss them off. In a smaller company, they are
liable to tell you there are no problems. What you’re going for is some
first-day-on-the-job knowledge — who actually calls the shots? Is there a
project on the table that some people think is not worth doing but others love?
If they’re willing to give up a little dirt here, it can help you in your first
weeks. It also shows that you care about fitting into the company and properly
negotiating all the personalities floating around.

### Final notes

All of these questions can lead into some great discussions. Don’t feel like you
need to jump into each one. Start with the most important or most informative
ones and go from there. It’s much better to have a back-and-forth than fire off
each question.

In my assessment of a company, I’m trying to find out **would I enjoy working
here**?and **would they want me as a colleague**** / employee**? Whatever
conversation we can have that leads me closer to an answer to either of those
questions is best. These prompts are just helpers to get there.

Good luck in your job search!
