---
title: "I Quit a Hackathon"
draft: false
date: "2018-04-14"
---
The short of it is: I don’t think I’m very good at hackathons. I’ve participated
in a handful, including two weekend-long adventures of continuous snacks and
sleeping on a hard floor. And I think I’ve come to the conclusion that it’s just
not worth it.

Here’s why: hackathons are all about show and almost nothing about “hack”.

![Midnight “challenge” of rock-paper-scissors](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*ViDn3VW6lWL_iD6jJjCt9Q.jpeg)

### What counts at a hackathon: the pitch

I’ve seen this at every hackathon I’ve participated in: the pitch is everything.
So the idea is important, of course. Without a good idea, you’ve got nothing.
But after that, you could draw something on physical paper and it would count as
much as actually building some tech. In fact, the teams I’ve seen do the best at
hackathons spend little time actually “hacking” and lots of time perfecting
their powerpoints and speeches.

I’ve seen this so consistently I believe I may have missed the point of
hackathons. But can you blame me? You’d think it would be about tech and you
certainly see a lot of people coding at these things. But I learned at my first
hackathon: don’t build the back-end. No one cares.

### Quitting a hackathon

[Hack For Sweden](https://hackforsweden.se/) was supposed to be different. I had
my coworkers with me (a real team, unlike other adventures where I tried to go
solo or met up with randos). We listened to the challenges and reviewed the data
sources. And we talked about how we could solve some of the problems of Swedish
society.

We came up with a great idea and spent Friday night working on it. And then
around 11pm, we found, on Google, the exact thing we were talking about
building. Back to the drawing board.

Saturday morning we went back to an earlier idea and got on it fiercely. Maps —
random plotted runs — competition with friends! Actually I would definitely use
our product. I might still build it. Nearish 1pm, a guy came around to tell us
how we would pitch: a 40-second video, a Powerpoint if we wanted it, and four
minutes. If we were selected by the judges to be one of 10 teams to do so. No
live demos. Once again, no one cares about what we’ve actually built — just
whether or not we have a good idea, if it looks pretty and if we can sell it.

#### What is the point of this?

Now I realize I am almost certainly missing the point. Some of the teams are
maybe trying to start companies, trying to get recognized for their ideas. Some
of them love this — love “pitching”. But what about those of us who just want to
learn, and build and have fun? There’s a nomenclature problem here. And I’ve got
ideas to fix it!

#### When all you have is a hammer…

You can’t solve every problem with an app. I know it’s tempting nowadays to go
that way, but much of this world is not better if we throw an app on it. But
that’s what you build at a hackathon. A platform for XYZ.

#### Who is benefiting here?

Hack For Sweden and Open Hack are seemingly do-gooder hackathons where we’re
helping nonprofits or cash-strapped government services. You can build something
for them and feel good about it. But some of these other hackathons — for
Spotify ffs? How does it make any sense to work for free all day for a
for-profit company? That’s just exploitation.

I also learned at this hackathon that there is a *company* that produces them.
An actual company whose job is to run hackathons. That is a big red flag to me —
if there’s enough money to support an entire company to run these things, what
is the product? Getting a whole bunch of talented people together in a room to
give their best ideas and work for free… and someone is making bank. How? I have
no idea. But I get the suspicion that I’m giving up something for which I should
rightfully charge.

![Lots of competent people at a hackathon in Stockholm](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*5vOoxoZzI4JtrBwp_pAi7w.jpeg)

### Towards a better hackathon

So let’s fix it! If hackathons kinda suck, what can we do? I’ve got some ideas.

#### If it’s a hackathon, let’s hack

First things first: if this event is about throwing together some code to do
something impressive with computers, let’s actually do that. Give me coding
challenges and I’ll see if I can beat the other teams. Give me something general
like “design an interface for X” and then we can see which design is picked by
the judges.

This pressure to come up with some “out of the box” idea, “build” it in 24–48
hours, and then pitch it brilliantly on stage… it’s silly. The coders want to
code. The idea people want to ideate. The designers want to design. Why are we
pretending that everyone is trying to start a business?

#### Eff this “unicorn” idea and just play

If there are baby companies that are looking for venture funding, they should
have their own event ([and they do](http://startuptour.di.se/)). Somehow coders
having fun building things got polluted with people who have legitimate business
ideas and want recognition.

#### Get the money out of it

I see one legitimate reason companies should pay for hackathons: to get exposure
to amazing developers, designers and UX people who might potentially like to
work elsewhere. If I had a software company and I needed to hire folks, I’d pay
lots of money to be in the room at that time. This is where the prize money and
all the cash required for those piles of snacks should come from. It benefits
everyone in the room.

#### Keep it to one day

The majority of hackers at these events are students. Some of them have great
ideas and “do” very well. They often have very limited ability to actually make
something — and no one cares. You might actually get some skilled folks out to
have fun if they can sleep in their own bed. Start the day at 8 and wrap up
after dinner (or earlier). You’ll have to scope the challenge, but that’s a good
thing.

#### Some hackathon concepts you can steal and run awesome events with

I want to see these “hackathons” so that I can stop getting excited about
corporate, showy, produce-something-out-of-the-box stage shows I’ve participated
in.

* New technology: Get participants in a room with a tech they’ve never tried
before (AR, maybe an API, something IBM dreamed up, Internet of Things) and give
them a challenge. See who / which team can produce the coolest thing.
* Coding challenges: Get a group of people together for [Code
Jam](https://code.google.com/codejam/) and offer local prizes. Similar for
whatever other coding challenges you can come with. Limit participants to those
who can program in the necessary languages.
* Non-coding challenges: If we’re “hacking” for ideas, hack for ideas! Leave the
coding out of it. Who can create the best idea, the best presentation — I have
zero problem with that if it’s stated ahead of time. Of course, then the
developers don’t have much to do and might stay home. That’s fine too.
* Art challenges: give participants a handful of movies or pictures or paintings
and get them to produce something beautiful. No practical benefit is necessary —
just something interesting. Judges can be artists, marketers, museum curators.

In short: if you’re going to give up your weekend, it should be to learn, to
network, to grow your skills and to have fun. If you can get that out of today’s
“hackathons”, then awesome! And if not, let’s build better tech events.
