---
title: "The Post-Bootcamp Job Search: My Experience"
subtitle: "Tech Jargon Series"
draft: false
date: "2017-04-24"
---
My job search has been weird, and I’m writing this article on March 17 but I
probably won’t publish it for a while. See, I started working as a teacher at
the bootcamp where I graduated. I thought I did pretty well and so did they and
— boom — I was teaching material I picked up a few weeks ago. It felt good.

For about a month. But as the days ticked by and I explained arrays and
parameters to people staring at me in confusion, I started to realize that I was
never going to level up here. I was constantly wishing my students away so I
could get back to programming, a tenuous situation for someone who is supposed
to be their teacher. I wanted to build stuff, but my job was teaching other
people how to build stuff. This wasn’t working out. If I wanted to be a
developer, I had to go find developer work.

*(And while it’s true that the teaching life wasn’t for me, I should note that,
usually, *[Craft Academy](https://medium.com/@CraftAcademy)* was an excellent
workplace. I’m very grateful for the time I was able to spend there.)*

### By the Numbers

- **Applications sent:** 31
- **Responses of any type:** 15
- **Definitely interviews:** 3
- **“Coffee” or “Fika” that was actually an interview:** 3
- **Technical interviews:** 3
- **Job offers:** 2
- **Days between first application and an offer:** 58
- **Meetups / networking events attended during this period:** 9 (wow, it felt like way more!)
- **Times I cried:** 2

#### The Interviews / “Fika” dates

So here’s a thing that happens: you meet someone at an event or send an open
application, and someone gets back to you that they want to have a coffee and
chat. Cool — you think, networking. Except somewhere ten minutes in, you realize
you are definitely interviewing and have to put your game face on. This happened
to me no less than three times during this process (you’d think I would have
wised up). Maybe it’s just a Swedish thing or maybe folks who have to hire
people are trying to keep it “casual” and want a chance to back out if they
don’t like you. Either way, half of my meetings fall into this category.

I’ll just talk about each one as they happened chronologically.

### The Out-of-Left-Field Fika / Interview

Way on back in early January, I went to a great meetup that was very closely
aligned with the technologies I’d been working on. It’s true that I was going to
these meetups thinking maybe sometime contacts I make there would help me get a
job, but I wasn’t actually looking.

I got an email from one of the attendees that he’d like to have a coffee and
chat. When he mentioned his business partner would be there, I wasn’t sure but I
figured this was a coffee / interview and indeed it was.

They explained their onboarding program for juniors, talked about office
culture, and we chatted about my current position. I was really excited — this
is exactly what I was hoping for by going to meetups. Could it be that easy? No.
Two weeks of silence, then I get an email from my contact that while they wanted
me to come in to pair program (which I now understand *is* the technical
interview), they wouldn’t have time until March. Well that was a bummer, but it
was also really nice through this process to think that hopefully sometime way
on in March I’d have an opportunity waiting. (See update at the bottom for how
this eventually panned out.)

The other thing about this first meeting / interview was that they have a great
onboarding / apprenticeship program to bring in new programmers or those not
familiar with their technologies and bring them up to speed. In some ways it
gave me the wrong impression about the industry, but it also gave me a high bar
for where I would end up. Legit onboarding programs exist, and that’s what I
wanted.

### The Disastrous Interview that Started Great

After the first coffee / interview, I actually started looking for work. If one
place was interested in me, then surely others would be as well. I went after
the low-hanging fruit:

* [Uptrail](https://www.uptrail.com/sv/lediga-jobb)
* Monster
* [Glassdoor](https://www.glassdoor.com/index.htm)
* [Indeed](https://se.indeed.com/?r=us)
* lots of recruiters
* LinkedIn

I quickly found one company that sounded like a great match for my (budding)
skills: a Rails shop. The CTO got back to me that night after I submitted my
application — exciting! We set up a time to meet in the next few days.

It was probably the best interview of my life. The CTO said I was “checking all
the boxes” and I got the distinct impression he was trying to sell me on working
there. We spent half the interview going over the structure of the company. This
was also my first interview in something like eight years (I worked for myself
for a long time before I moved to Sweden).

Later that day he sent me a programming test to “get a sense of my style”. I
don’t know if it’s bad practice to publish them, so I won’t, but suffice to say
it took some input, from a text file, and was meant to give some output. I put
together the test in an hour or so and I thought it was pretty easy, perhaps
suspiciously easy. Then again, they said it wasn’t meant to be hard.

The CTO had told me he’d talk to me early in the week to schedule a technical
interview later in the week. I wasn’t worried on Wednesday, because people are
busy. In the meantime, I saw this company advertising these job openings
*everywhere, *on every job board I looked at. They were clearly desperate for
people. It wasn’t my dream job and there were some red flags (after talking to
some tech friends) but still, it would be nice to get some practice doing a
technical interview and at least I’d get to meet a couple developers and get
more of a sense of the office and code base.

Then the CTO writes me: my answer to the test proves I am too inexperienced and
the team won’t be able to dedicate the resources to bring me to up speed so that
I can be a productive contributor. Ouch!

I spent approximately 8 hours wallowing in self-pity before I picked myself up
and started really trying: what did I do wrong and how can I fix it?

#### What I did wrong and how I could fix it

The short answer to that question is: I have no idea. I talked with a lot of
folks about this and they all said that my test seemed fine and that the part I
missed (because I did skip what I thought was a small piece) is something I
could pick up in just a few minutes. Go figure.

In the meantime, though, this rejection lit something of a fire under my ass.
I’d already gotten back into coding in my spare time and now I really stepped up
my game. I got an algorithms textbook and started [teaching myself basic
algorithms](https://medium.com/craft-academy/introduction-to-algorithms-chapter-two-part-one-fe76fe513024#.74xyx2dv8).
I put together a couple personal projects, [one of
which](http://apimachine.herokuapp.com/) actually got more or less finished. I
spent a substantial amount of time on [codewars](http://www.codewars.com/). I
started work on a much more [ambitious side
project](https://github.com/amberwilkie/snack-app). In short, I started leveling
up.

Some weeks later, I ran into one of the engineers at this company. He apologized
that they hadn’t hired me, then told me it wasn’t necessarily the test, but my
CV that was the problem. Why did you bring me in for an interview if you weren’t
hiring juniors? I asked. He said they didn’t know at the time they weren’t
hiring juniors. Fair enough, I guess. But I was glad to have a bit more
information.

#### An aside: the trouble with the job search

Ok, there’s plenty of trouble. But one major problem is that you have so few
data points to work with. One always wants to learn from failures, but if you
send out ten applications to ten jobs that you are actually qualified for, and
four of them write you back with a no, does that mean your cover letter sucks
and you should re-write it? Does it mean your CV sucks and you need to gain some
more experience? Maybe your Github needs to be better organized and cleaned up.
You have no idea! And then you need to send out the next ten applications.

If one of those ten writes you back and invites you for an interview, does that
mean the cover letter, CV and everything else are A-ok and you should stick with
a “proven” set of materials? It’s infuriating to try to adjust one’s approach
with so little data. You mostly just have to do the best you can and read some
advice on the internet.

### The “Coffee” that became definitely not an interview

I didn’t have another bite for a month, which was pretty discouraging. Then in
early February, Chalmers (a local university) had a massive career fair. I
crashed it and spoke to as many companies as made sense: a lot of recruiters,
consultancy firms and others looking to hire CS grads. I have more and a more
complicated work and education history vs. a new CS grad, but if a company is
interested in that, they should be interested in me. I left that career fair
feeling pretty good: lots of contacts and a couple meetings.

The week after the fair, one of the places I had sent an “open application”
wrote back — he’d like to have a coffee.

(Another aside: after you apply to all the job postings on all the job boards,
you run out of things to do. The next step is to do a metric ton of research
into the local economy — who does the work that you want to do? Chances are they
have an “open application” policy where they are always looking. Just send your
cover letter and CV over and see what they say. You can also look at jobs for
which you do not qualify and head over to the website to see if they are looking
for juniors too. Even if they don’t say they are, write.)

I was a really good match for this company, skill-wise. On their list of
technologies, I was familiar with probably 5/6. I hadn’t seen a better matchup
between me and a job listing. If they hire juniors, I’d make a perfect junior
(and that’s almost exactly what I wrote in my cover letter).

So we have coffee. And it’s going fairly well. And he asks me what I’m looking
for in my next job. First thing, I say, is I’m looking for a bit of mentorship —
not necessarily from one person but I’m looking for an encouraging, helpful
environment. And I’m not going to say he freaked out, but the coffee / interview
definitely turned into just coffee at that point. He leaned back, put away his
notepad, and said this: We give new hires a laptop and then basically expect
them to start producing.

Well, gosh.

He was quite done with me at that point, but I used the opportunity to grill him
on hiring juniors. Do they do that? (yes) Where do they hire people from? (he
mentioned hackathons) How many developers at the company? (25) And they don’t
have an onboarding program? (no)

I also asked him for advice on what skills I might try to gain in order to be a
more attractive candidate (build something that breaks databases). And if he had
any advice for other places I might apply that may be receptive to my CV
(consultancy firms). He was a nice guy, and talked to me for quite a while. But
yeah, this was a pretty depressing fika and he gave me the strong impression he
thought I wasn’t ready to work as a developer (though he did not actually say
that).

#### Is it me or is it bootcamps?

When you’re job-hunting (and basically with anything in life), you can either
find a problem with yourself or with outside circumstances. At this point, I was
ready to blame bootcamps and specifically bootcamp education in Sweden. I knew I
could code a bunch of stuff and that I was getting pretty good with the kinds of
things companies actually do with software. But the people I was talking to
couldn’t see that at all.

[Craft Academy](https://medium.com/@CraftAcademy) is the first bootcamp in
Sweden, and we’ve only been around two years. The market wasn’t ready for us, I
was thinking, even though there are *tons* of openings in tech here. I’m
somewhat convinced this is still the case. People haven’t seen bootcamp
graduates here, so they are wary. They’re used to hiring CS grads, so they feel
comfortable spending resources on them. But bootcamp grads are an unknown
quantity. Only seven months in programming? That’s crazy talk. The people we
normally hire have four years… of university education in theory. The market
will change, because we can see it in the states. But it’s a slow process. And
it requires a little more heartache on the job trail than perhaps others
experience.

### The “Technical” Interview that wasn’t

One of the more promising leads from the Chalmers career fair was a small
consultancy firm who wants to expand their web development department. I liked
what I heard then and I wasn’t sure what to make of them from research: it
seemed like they did a *lot* of stuff.

The first interview went really well, even though it was short. We spoke for
about half an hour, mostly about me. Fifteen minutes in, the founders started
talking about where I might be of use in the company — different projects I
might be good for. That sounded promising! They wrapped it up before I really
had a chance to ask any questions myself. We scheduled a technical interview
with the developers.

When I came in the next week for the “technical” interview, I met with the two
in-house developers, both of whom were on the junior side (maybe a year or two
experience for both). We talked quite generally about coding and things like
databases and testing, but they didn’t look at any code or ask me any
code-related questions. The three of us didn’t overlap on any languages, so
maybe that had something to do with it. Still, I thought it was odd that the
“technical” interview was so chatty. I left not really knowing too much more
about the company, even though this time we talked for an hour and a half. I got
the impression they are looking to grow and will just move into whatever the
people they hire can do. Not the best.

Anyway, that was weeks ago and I have yet to hear from anyone at that company.
Maybe they’re interviewing a bunch of people and don’t want to tell me no until
they are sure they don’t have someone who is a better match, skill-wise? Either
way, I knew it wasn’t the right fit for me.

### The interview where I probably sent the wrong blog post

I’m jumping over one, but only by a day. I met this person during my “hell week”
(or “awesome week”, depending). I had no fewer than three interviews in a row
(when it rains, it pours). This was my last and another one of these “coffee
chats” so I didn’t dress up (ok, much), I didn’t put on my guard (I mentioned
other interviews I’d been on) and generally was just looking to get advice about
joining the industry. Except, after my “tell me about you” spiel, she starts
talking about “if you came on board”. So then I was interviewing again.

She asked me to send over some work examples, which I did. I don’t have much
public Javascript work. Though we have been doing a bunch of JS stuff here at
[Craft Academy](https://medium.com/@CraftAcademy), it’s all in private repos.
Everything I did in Javascript in the bootcamp was pretty rudimentary so I
preferred to send more advanced Ruby / Rails stuff than JS.

I also managed to send over [an article I’d
written](https://medium.com/craft-academy/everything-i-learned-from-javascript30-d8d2db246b7#.j8kx2tgs2)
that got a lot of attention. It’s all about Javascript, but about how I had
learned so much from a tutorial. I knew it was exposing weakness and making me
vulnerable, but I went for it anyway. The article included this quote:

> But my home base is in Ruby. With Javascript I’m less solid. Maybe there’s more
> to know, or maybe I just haven’t spent as much time with the beast. I’ve
probably spent twice as much time writing Ruby code as Javascript code.

Maybe that had absolutely nothing with the “no” I got from her a while later,
but I have my suspicions. Either way, I also don’t think that was going to be
the best fit for me, so it’s totally fine.

### The great interview

Finally, the great interview(s)! I am torn about mentioning the actual company,
since I am going to work there and no doubt you will hear lots about them. But
since I kept all the other guys anonymous, seems about right to do so for them
as well.

I had three / four interviews with this company. The first was with one of the
founders and the CTO. It went really well. They seemed to like me and my
approach. I also very briefly met the CTO at a tech meetup so I am going to
officially count “networking” as part of my success.

The second interview was also just chatting, this time with both founders. They
asked me harder questions about my values and whatnot. In this interview I
managed to literally say: “It’s not about the money” (facepalm), which is just
typical oversharing on my part. Harder questions but I’m still the same person
so I think this one went really well also. Plus, they told me immediately
afterward that they’d contact me for the technical interview, so I didn’t have
long to wonder if they liked me.

#### The technical interview

The technical interview was a few days later: 3.5 hours of pair programming with
the developers! I was so nervous but it was actually kind of fun — that’s what
happens when you enjoy your work, right?

First we talked to another colleague about her feature request. She wanted a new
button on a view contact form that would give that contact a new “state” in the
database. We entered the feature into Pivotal Tracker (seen that guy before!)
and got to work. I’m very happy to report they use test-driven development, at
least on the back-end. So the CTO wrote a test and I was tasked to make it pass.
Rails APIs are my wheelhouse, so this wasn’t so hard to figure out, once I got
down the rabbit holes of all the helper methods and constants and such. The
hardest part was figuring out we were running the test wrong. Once that blocker
was cleared, it was pretty smooth sailing.

Then we made a PR (this all felt very comfortable, to be honest) and I bumped
over to the front-end to implement the button in React. This went well enough,
but I don’t know React so I was 99% just copy-pasting. It was really
low-pressure though, my interviewer explained the React component — provider —
container — reducer — store thing to me and very much showed me where to
copy-paste. We hit another road block — the problem was on the server! — and
then, boom, we were done.

I was pretty sure they were going to offer me a job when the founder said to me
on the way out: “I’ll call you tomorrow and we can talk about the future.”

### Update: March 25

See, how can you write a blog post about landing a job when you haven’t signed
yet? Between getting an offer at the “great interview” place and actually
hearing any salary details, the very first place (the “out-of-left-field
interview”) finally got back to me! They wanted to bring me in for a *full day
of pair programming*.

So I stalled the last company (we’ll just call them Company #1) and went in to
“explore my options” with Company #2. The pairing was pretty great, the
atmosphere there was reserved and polite, everyone seemed really helpful. By the
next morning, I had a job offer there too!

I spent that whole morning before my meeting with #1 (yes, I had a meeting that
same day where we were supposed to finalize negotiations) talking to everyone I
know in tech who was awake at that hour, making pro/con lists and googling. My
pro/con lists revealed what I already knew: *both* of these options were great.
If either of them had come up in isolation, I would be thrilled to land there.
Coming to a decision was very difficult. I decided not to decide that day
(Friday) but give everyone an answer after the weekend.

When I went into the meeting with Company #1, I wasn’t sure what I was going to
do. Actually, I was probably leaning #2. But you know what, it just *feels good*
at #1. All things considered, I think I’ll have more fun at #1. I think I’ll
have a more pleasant environment day-to-day. And I *had* considered all the
things — there were huge benefits to working at either company and very little
downside. So I went ahead and used my gut after all.

### In sum and advice for other job-seekers

Those 58 days were rough, y’all. At first, I was optimistic. There were *tons*
of jobs to apply to and I was very confident about being a fast learner. Plus, I
had that kick-off coffee / interview thing that made it clear at least one
company thought I was interesting as a candidate. I got an interview almost
immediately after starting to look for jobs (actually the “disastrous” interview
was the first place I sent an application). But that first you-are-too-junior
blow was a big one and put me in a dark place for a while.

Job hunting is an insane emotional rollercoaster. When you get a response, you
are elated. When you are preparing for an interview, you are nervous. If you get
a rejection, you can deeply doubt yourself — your education and your value. The
best advice I have is the main thing that kept me moving on: learn what you can
from failures and keep playing the numbers game.

It also helped *so much* that a former bootcamp graduate had recently landed a
job she loves. Without [Lucia](https://medium.com/@luciademoja) as my example, I
would have found it much harder to just carry on and keep my chin up. Lucia went
looking with a few months’ less coding skills than me, so if she could find a
job, I could find a job. I relied on her a lot during this process — both to
learn from her experience and also to bounce ideas off her and to use her
shoulder to cry on. Thank you Lucia!!

#### The advice in sum:

* It’s a numbers game. Apply everywhere.
* When you are rejected / ignored, try to learn from the experience. If you can,
ask follow-up questions to those who reject you and try and find some action
points you can take to make you a better candidate at the next place.
* Talk to people. Go to meetups. Try to have informational interviews. The more
people you meet, the more likely you will hear about an opening or become
interesting for someone.
* Have someone review your CV and cover letter. Preferably not your spouse, unless
they are in tech.
* If at all possible, tell your boss you are looking. It makes arranging
interviews and pair programming sessions so much easier and bonus: no lying.
* Emphasize your ability to learn and your passion for the work. Your skillset is
not going to be impressive; your motivation, dedication and focus will impress.
If it doesn’t, that’s probably not the right place to land anyway.
* Not every job is the right job for you. Apply everywhere at first, and use the
interviews to gauge the company. Ask what the actual work is like. Talk to the
developers if possible. Don’t be afraid to use the process to find out what kind
of work you want to do — most of us coming out of bootcamp really don’t know
what it’s like to work as a developer. Your exposure to all these companies can
help.
* This may be the hardest part, but be patient. You’ve heard over and over that
the industry is hungry for developers. It’s true! But not everyone is in a
position to hire juniors. And of those who are, many are not receptive to
bootcamp grads. And of *those*, many have woefully inadequate onboarding
programs (or haven’t bothered to think about it at all) and it would be
difficult for you to thrive there. The good position is worth waiting for, if
you possibly can.

And that’s it! This was a huge blog post, but I wanted to keep all the
hero’s-quest + woe-is-me job hunt stuff together. Best of luck on your own
journey! Now I’m off to go build some stuff.
