---
title: "My tech-savvy solution for (not) reading on the web"
subtitle: "Combine Pocket and Kindle to get your eyes off your screen"
draft: false
date: "2018-11-03"
---
If you are anything like I was, you have at this moment 17 tabs open with
articles that you are waiting to read. If these words are passing through your
brain at the moment, it’s highly likely I jumped the gun on those other 17 —
suckers!

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*hgOOKFjSpsRPpNYI4hJU9A.jpeg)

I love my online / offline reading setup. As a bonus, it keeps me away from
Facebook and Twitter. As a second bonus, and don’t tell anyone, but I also
manage to avoid most pay walls (without doing anything unseemly).

#### Ingredients

All of this stuff is free, except for the Kindle.

* A Kindle (probably any kind will work, though I have a Paperwhite). You can get
them used for quite cheap.
* [Pocket](http://www.getpocket.com/)
* [Pocket to Kindle](https://p2k.co/)
* [Nuzzle](https://nuzzel.com/) (optional)
* [Reader
View](https://addons.mozilla.org/sv-SE/firefox/addon/activate-reader-view/)
(optional — Firefox). [For
Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/reader-view/ecabifbgmdmgdllomnfinbmaellmclnh/related?hl=en)
(though I haven’t used it).

### Here’s what you do

**Step one: buy a Kindle.** Set it up, connect it to wifi. Start loving on it.
Bonus info for how I get my reading material below.

Pocket is a great little service that saves articles on the web into an online
repository for you. It’s a lot like Pinterest, but for readers, not photo stuff.

**Step two: Install Pocket’s [browser
extension](https://getpocket.com/chrome/)** (Chrome), then go through your 17
tabs and save them all in Pocket. **Now close all those tabs — you can recover
your browser!

**Step three: Pop over to Pocket to Kindle and sign up to transfer your Pocket
articles to your Kindle.**

My delivery settings are on the left. The idea here is that when you have three
articles you have saved, P2K will gather them up, pack them in a Kindle “book”
and send them to your Kindle. It will then delete (archive) those articles from
your Pocket in order to send you fresh ones the next time you rack up three.
Don’t worry — all 17 articles will eventually make it to your Kindle, it will
just take a few days to cycle through your backlog.

**Step four: continue enjoying the vast resources of the internet without having
to read on a screen. **Any time you come across an article you want to read
online, you can just click the little “Save to Pocket” button in your browser
and end up reading that article on your Kindle the next day or whenever you feel
like it.

#### Pay walls

Many of the best news organizations have (rightly) started charging for their
online content. Medium itself often shows me articles I don’t have the right to
read (you can see three “premium” articles for free every month, then are
supposed to pay). For whatever reason, though, Pocket and P2K frequently bypass
those requirements and send you the full article. ~~This works on Medium~~, for
example, but not the New York Times (you just get a little article stub). Your
favorite media sources may or may not be tech-savvy enough to prevent you
reading the full article through this stack.

If you do pay for your media and for whatever reason aren’t logged in
everywhere, or the login process is so onerous as to prevent you from reading
their material (*raises hand*), you can feel totally great about this hack.
Otherwise, your scruples may vary.

### Optional but awesome additional recommendations

The above is all you need to get the words on the internet off your computer and
onto your Kindle for more enjoyable reading. I’ve got two more (free) resources
that further transform your online life.

#### **Reader view extensions**.

I do most of my online browsing in Firefox and their reader view extension is
great. I don’t know much about the Chrome one. If you’re trying to find recipes
or doing research or pretty much anything, this is so handy. Click the little
icon in your browser and instantly all of the ads and auto-play videos
(*shudder*) are gone and what you have is plain old text and the images related
to the article.

Not directly related to this setup, but if you, like me, read the first couple
paragraphs of a thing to see if you really want to dive in, this is a great way
to avoid the insane annoyance of the web.

#### **Nuzzle.**

After the 2016 election, I knew I needed to get off Facebook. But like so many,
I was getting most of my news from that torrid source of vitrol and
fearmongering (like a dope, yes). Similar for Twitter. I still wanted to be
informed but avoid the banter.

Nuzzle does exactly that — aggregating the articles people I follow are posting
on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc. (you have to connect each one). I stay up
to date without having to go into Facebook. And then… if you see an article you
like, you “share” it with Pocket. And it ends up in the same flow as everything
else you send to Pocket.

This is where I get most of my reading material — the intelligent people of
Twitter and such post links, Nuzzle aggregates them, and in a couple clicks I’ve
delivered them to my Kindle for reading at my leisure. I don’t even have to get
past the headline with Nuzzle — if something piques my interest I can send it
over to the Kindle and decide later that it’s not worth reading.

### Bonus tip for the Kindle

I’ve had a Kindle for probably a solid decade at this point. I honestly love the
hell out of my Kindle and will go to the mat vs. any other reader. The
integration I’ve explained above is worth it alone, IMO. I never read anything
online anymore and I loooooove it.

But what about the rest of your reading? If you are an American or a Swede (and
probably lots and lots of other countries — those are just the ones I know), you
likely have access to Overdrive through your library. There you will find untold
numbers of Kindle books waiting to be checked out and delivered to your little
computer / bookshelf.

#### Some Overdrive hacks

* If share your Overdrive account with someone else, you can both read the
checked-out books on your respective Kindles.
* If your book is about to expire and you aren’t done, throw your Kindle into
airplane mode. The Kindle won’t get the message to “return” the book until it
has wifi again, and you can finish the book at your leisure.

And that, my friends, is my online reading hackery. Happy to answer any
questions if you’re intrigued but can’t quite figure it all out.
